VoIP System Setup Using Asterisk and Zoiper

Overview
This guide describes how to set up a simple VoIP system using Asterisk on Ubuntu as the server and Zoiper as the SIP client. The system will enable two laptops/PCs to communicate over the same network using SIP accounts configured on the Asterisk server.
This repor contains the .conf files required to properly setup the asterisk voip server in Ubuntu.

Steps to Set Up the VoIP System
1. Install Asterisk on Ubuntu

Update your system and install Asterisk:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install asterisk

Verify the installation:
asterisk -rvvv
This will connect you to the Asterisk CLI.

2. Prepare Configuration Files

Configure sip.conf to define two SIP accounts. Use unique usernames, passwords, and other settings.
Configure extensions.conf to set up a dial plan that enables calling between the defined SIP accounts.

Note: Make sure these configuration files are placed in /etc/asterisk/. If already done, proceed to the next step.

3. Restart Asterisk Service
To apply the changes made to the configuration files, restart the Asterisk service:
sudo systemctl restart asterisk

4. Install Zoiper on Two Laptops/PCs
Download and install Zoiper on two separate laptops/PCs.
You can download Zoiper from its official website.
Ensure both laptops/PCs are connected to the same local network as the Asterisk server.

5. Configure Zoiper SIP Accounts
Open Zoiper on each laptop/PC.
Add a new SIP account with the following settings:
Username: Use the SIP username defined in sip.conf (e.g., 1001 for one laptop and 1002 for the other).
Password: Use the SIP password defined for the corresponding username.
Domain: Enter the IP address of the Asterisk server.
Save the account and ensure it registers successfully with the Asterisk server.

6. Test the Setup
On Laptop 1, use Zoiper to dial the extension configured for Laptop 2 (e.g., 1002).
On Laptop 2, ensure Zoiper is running and accept the incoming call.
Verify that audio is working in both directions.

Additional Configuration
Firewall Settings:
Ensure the server allows SIP (port 5060/UDP) and RTP (ports 10000–20000/UDP):

sudo ufw allow 5060/udp
sudo ufw allow 10000:20000/udp

Network Considerations:
If the laptops are on different networks, configure port forwarding or use a VPN to establish the connection.
